feat(blog): add Velxio browser-based ESP32 simulation article (#780)
espressif/developer-portal: content/blog/2026/07/velxio-browser-based-esp32-simulation/index.md

---
title: "Velxio: Browser-Based ESP32 Simulation That Runs on Real Hardware, Powered by AI Agents"
date: 2026-07-23

> summary: "Velxio is an open-source, browser-based embedded simulator that runs real ESP32 firmware on emulated silicon — same toolchain, same binaries, zero installs. This hands-on introduction blinks an LED, joins WiFi, round-trips MQTT through a public broker, and flashes the exact same sketch to a real DevKit."

Reviewer: The summary should explain just what the article is about. Something like:

```suggestion
summary: "This article introduces Velxio, an open source browser based embedded simulator that runs real ESP32 firmware on emulated hardware. It demonstrates LED blinking, WiFi connection, and MQTT communication, explaining how it works under the hood."
```

Author: Done, rewrote the summary along these lines

tags:
  - ESP32
  - ESP32-S3
  - ESP32-C3
  - Arduino
  - simulation
  - education
authors:
  - "david-montero-crespo"
---

> What if you could hand someone a link — no hardware, no toolchain, no account — and five seconds later they'd be watching an ESP32 circuit in action? This isn't a simulation: it's the same `arduino-esp32` toolchain you use locally, producing a genuine `.bin`, executing on an emulated Xtensa core, printing to a serial monitor at 115200 baud. And when they're convinced, they flash that exact binary to a real DevKit without changing a line.

Reviewer: This opening sentence sounds a bit AI-generated because of the dashes, the rhetorical question, and the negation-affirmation structure. Could you rephrase it to sound more natural?

Author: Applied

That's [Velxio](https://velxio.dev), an open-source, browser-based simulator for embedded systems. I built it to lower the barrier to embedded development: experiment first, buy hardware second, and carry your firmware across that boundary untouched. In this article I'll walk through what Velxio is, run two ESP32 projects hands-on, look under the hood at how the emulation works, and show the path from simulation to silicon.

> **The ESP32 family is the most-used architecture on Velxio.** Of all the simulations users ran in the last 90 days, more than half focused on boards from the ESP32 family, ahead of the classic Arduino Uno. When developers have the option to freely choose virtual hardware, they usually opt for ESP32.

Reviewer: I would remove this comment. 
```suggestion
```

Author: Applied

## What is Velxio?

Velxio is a multi-board embedded simulator that runs in a browser tab. The core pieces:

- **Real CPU emulation, not behavioral models.** ESP32 boards run on a QEMU fork with Xtensa LX6/LX7 and RISC-V system emulation; AVR and RP2040 boards run entirely in the browser via [avr8js](https://github.com/wokwi/avr8js) and rp2040js.
- **A real compilation chain.** `arduino-cli` and ESP-IDF produce genuine `.hex`, `.uf2`, and `.bin` files server-side. What you run in the simulator is what you'd flash.
- **30+ boards across 6 CPU architectures** — ten of them ESP32-family, alongside Arduino AVR boards, Raspberry Pi Pico, STM32 (Blue Pill through F4 Discovery), and Raspberry Pi single-board computers booting Linux on emulated Cortex-A cores.
- **150+ interactive components** — LEDs, sensors, OLED and TFT displays, NeoPixel strips, ePaper panels, MicroSD cards, motors — dragged onto a canvas and wired to your board.
- **Hybrid digital + analog co-simulation.** ngspice compiled to WebAssembly solves the analog side: `analogRead()` returns the actual node voltage from Modified Nodal Analysis, so op-amps saturate and diodes drop volts like they should.

> - **Arduino C++ and MicroPython**, multi-file workspaces, a library manager backed by the Arduino library index, and 300+ one-click example projects — nearly 80 of them on ESP32-family boards.

Reviewer: ESP-IDF is not supported? DO you plan to support it in the future?

Author: Yes, ESP-IDF is supported. Done

    caption="The ESP32 blink example: code editor, wired circuit, real build log, and serial monitor in one browser tab"
>}}

Everything in that screenshot is live: you can edit the code and re-run, drag components while the simulation runs, type into the serial monitor, or open the scope panel and probe a pin.

## Under the hood

Velxio's ESP32 support does not use simplified peripheral models. Each ESP32-family board boots a real QEMU system emulation with register-level peripherals:

| Peripheral | Emulation detail |
|-----------|-----------------|
| GPIO | Full digital I/O on all pins, wired to the canvas components |
| UART | Multiple UARTs with auto-baud detection, bridged to the Serial Monitor |
| ADC | 12-bit multi-channel; reads real solved voltages from the SPICE co-simulation |
| I²C / SPI | Protocol-level emulation driving OLED, TFT, sensor and SD components |
| RMT | WS2812-timing-accurate NeoPixel strips render correctly |
| LEDC / PWM | Hardware PWM channels |
| WiFi | Virtual access point (`Velxio-GUEST`) with SLIRP NAT out to the internet |
| Camera | ESP32-CAM bridges a real webcam frame into the emulated camera module |

> The compile side is equally real. ESP32 sketches build against the arduino-esp32 3.3.10 core on ESP-IDF v5.5 inside the backend. A cold build compiles the full IDF (~1,500 objects, a few minutes), but ccache plus persistent per-target build directories mean warm compiles land in **under a minute** — typically well under. Build options mirror the Arduino IDE Tools menu: partition schemes, CPU frequency, flash mode/size, PSRAM, core pinning for the Arduino loop — all serialized per board and translated into `sdkconfig` at compile time. You can even upload files into a SPIFFS partition from the browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The compile side is equally real. ESP32 sketches build against the arduino-esp32 3.3.10 core on ESP-IDF v5.5 inside the backend. A cold build compiles the full IDF (~1,500 objects, a few minutes), but ccache plus persistent per-target build directories mean warm compiles land in **under a minute**. Build options mirror the Arduino IDE Tools menu: partition schemes, CPU frequency, flash mode/size, PSRAM, core pinning for the Arduino loop, all serialized per board and translated into `sdkconfig` at compile time. You can even upload files into a SPIFFS partition from the browser.
```

Author: Done

> ESP32-C3 boards take the same path on QEMU's RISC-V system emulation (RV32IMC), so the C3's peripherals — GPIO, UART, and friends — are also emulated at the register level, not approximated.

Reviewer: I would remove a few redundancies:
```suggestion
ESP32-C3 boards take the same path on QEMU's RISC-V system emulation (RV32IMC), so the C3's peripherals are also emulated at the register level.
```

Author: Done

> Here's that peripheral stack in action — an [ESP32 Weather Station](https://velxio.dev/dave/estacin-meteorolgica-esp32) reading a BMP280 (temperature + pressure) over I²C and a DHT22 (humidity) on a GPIO, and drawing a live dashboard on an ILI9341 TFT over SPI through the Adafruit GFX stack — both emulated buses working at once. And this project has a twist: it wasn't wired by hand. It was designed, wired, and programmed end-to-end by Velxio's AI agent (that's its chat panel on the right of the screenshot) — more on that below.

Reviewer: This part feels a bit overwhelming with all the details packed between dashes. Could you restructure it as a bullet point list?

Author: done

{{< figure
    default=true
    src="img/station.webp"
    alt="ESP32 Weather Station running in Velxio, built end-to-end by the AI agent"
    caption="ESP32 Weather Station: BMP280 over I²C, DHT22 on GPIO, ILI9341 over SPI — designed, wired, and programmed by the AI agent"
>}}

### WiFi that actually reaches the internet

> The emulated ESP32 joins a virtual open access point and gets NAT'd through the host. That means real `WiFi.begin()`, real DHCP, real DNS — and real TCP out to the world. The gallery's MQTT example connects to `broker.hivemq.com`, publishes to a unique topic, subscribes to the same topic, and toggles GPIO2 every time a message round-trips through the actual public broker:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The emulated ESP32 joins a virtual open access point and gets NAT'd through the host. That means real `WiFi.begin()`, real DHCP, real DNS, and real TCP out to the world. The gallery's MQTT example connects to `broker.hivemq.com`, publishes to a unique topic, subscribes to the same topic, and toggles GPIO2 every time a message round-trips through the actual public broker:
```

Author: done

```cpp
#include <WiFi.h>
#include <PubSubClient.h>

const char* WIFI_SSID   = "Velxio-GUEST";     // open AP the emulator advertises
const char* MQTT_BROKER = "broker.hivemq.com";

void connectWiFi() {
  WiFi.mode(WIFI_STA);
  WiFi.begin(WIFI_SSID);
  while (WiFi.status() != WL_CONNECTED) { delay(300); Serial.print("."); }
  Serial.printf("\nWiFi connected, IP %s\n", WiFi.localIP().toString().c_str());
}
```

> HTTP clients, web servers (proxied so you can open the ESP32's page in another tab), and MQTT all work inside the simulation. Try it: [velxio.dev/example/esp32-wifi-mqtt](https://velxio.dev/example/esp32-wifi-mqtt).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HTTP clients, web servers (proxied so you can open the ESP32's page in another tab), and MQTT all work inside the simulation. Try this example: [velxio.dev/example/esp32-wifi-mqtt](https://velxio.dev/example/esp32-wifi-mqtt).
```

Author: done

## An AI agent that builds circuits and firmware

The [weather station above](https://velxio.dev/dave/estacin-meteorolgica-esp32) was not assembled by hand. Velxio includes an AI agent (on paid plans) that works directly on your live canvas and code editor: you describe what you want to build, and it builds it in front of you.

Concretely, the agent:

- **Designs the circuit.** It picks a board and parts from the same 150+ component library you use, drops them on the canvas or seats them on a breadboard, and wires pin to pin. Agent-drawn wires are auto-routed around components, so the layout comes out looking hand-made.

> - **Writes the firmware** — Arduino C++ or MicroPython, multi-file if needed, installing Arduino libraries along the way (with your approval).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Writes the firmware**. It codes in Arduino C++ or MicroPython, multi-file if needed, installing Arduino libraries along the way (with your approval).
```

Author: done

- **Compiles and runs it.** The sketch goes through the real arduino-esp32 toolchain and boots on the emulated silicon. If the build fails, the agent reads the compiler errors, fixes the code, and recompiles until it builds.
- **Verifies its own work.** It reads the serial monitor, inspects the actually-rendered state of displays and LEDs, and can press buttons in the running simulation to confirm the firmware reacts.

> The technical part worth noting: the agent drives the exact same tool surface the UI does. Your browser sends the workspace state with each turn; the server-side agent mutates it through typed tools (add a component, run a wire, edit a file, compile, run) and streams every action back, so you watch parts appear and wires route in real time. Because the compilation and the emulation are real, the agent's feedback loop is real too — it iterates against genuine build output and register-level emulated hardware, not a mock. That's what lets it hand you a working project like the weather station from a one-sentence prompt.

Reviewer: Maybe a mermaid diagram would make this concept more impactful.

Author: done

> There is also a Tutor mode that flips the same machinery into read-only: instead of building, it walks you through an existing circuit and its code step by step — useful in classrooms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is also a Tutor mode that flips the same system to read-only. Instead of building, it walks you through an existing circuit and its code step by step, making it ideal for classrooms.
```

Author: done

## The ESP32 ecosystem on Velxio

Ten ESP32-family boards are supported today, spanning all three cores Espressif ships in the Arduino ecosystem:

| Board | Core | Notes |
|-------|------|-------|
| ESP32 DevKit V1 | Xtensa LX6, dual-core | The workhorse; WiFi + full GPIO |
| ESP32 DevKit C V4 | Xtensa LX6 | Official Espressif devkit layout |
| ESP32-CAM | Xtensa LX6 | Camera module fed by a real webcam |
| Wemos Lolin32 Lite | Xtensa LX6 | Popular battery-friendly board |
| ESP32-S3 DevKit | Xtensa LX7, dual-core | Hardware SPI (GPSPI2) peripherals |
| Seeed XIAO ESP32-S3 | Xtensa LX7 | Ultra-compact |
| Arduino Nano ESP32 | Xtensa LX7 (ESP32-S3) | Arduino form factor |
| ESP32-C3 DevKit | RISC-V RV32IMC | Emulated via QEMU RISC-V |
| Seeed XIAO ESP32-C3 | RISC-V RV32IMC | Ultra-compact |
| ESP32-C3 SuperMini | RISC-V RV32IMC | Mini development board |

> Both Arduino C++ and MicroPython are available on the ESP32 family — the language dropdown sits right in the toolbar.

Reviewer: I would suggest to add a screenshot highlighting the option. Otherwise, you could also remove the second part of the sentence. 
```suggestion
Both Arduino C++ and MicroPython are available on the ESP32 family: The language dropdown sits right in the toolbar.
```

Author: Ok, done

Beyond single boards, Velxio 3.0's multi-board canvas wires boards to each other: UART, I²C, and SPI links between any two boards are resolved through the actual drawn wires, so an ESP32 can talk Serial2 to a Pico that talks to an Uno, all in one simulation. A SignalRouter models the ESP32's GPIO matrix so peripherals land on the pins your firmware asked for.

## By the numbers

Velxio's community today, for a sense of where ESP32 sits in it:

- **15,000+ registered developers**, growing by ~4,700 in the last 30 days
- **80,000+ simulations** in the last 90 days — **more than half on ESP32-family boards**
- ESP32, ESP32-C3, ESP32-CAM, ESP32-S3 and XIAO ESP32 boards all rank among the most-run boards on the platform

> - **2,500+ GitHub stars**, 240+ forks on the open-source core

Reviewer: This part would fit better in the introduction, as it breaks the flow here. Additionally, I’d recommend avoiding specific numbers, since they can quickly become outdated. If possible, rephrase the content to ensure it remains relevant over time.

```suggestion

### Velxio's community today

- **15,000+ registered developers**, growing by ~4,700 in the last 30 days -> maybe remove the growing 
- **80,000+ simulations** in the last 90 days -> More than 1k simulation every day
- **2,500+ GitHub stars**, 240+ forks on the open-source core
```

Author: rewritten and uploaded to the beginning of this part

  -v velxio-arduino-user-libs:/root/Arduino \
  -v velxio-ccache:/var/cache/ccache \
  -v velxio-build:/var/lib/velxio-build \
  ghcr.io/davidmonterocrespo24/velxio:master
```

Open `http://localhost:3080` and every board — all ESP32 variants included — works offline on your own hardware. The named volumes keep the ccache and Arduino libraries warm across container rebuilds, which is what keeps ESP32 compile times short. Schools and workshops run Velxio this way on a single shared server.

## What's next for ESP32 on Velxio

Two efforts are underway that Espressif developers may find especially interesting:

- **Browser-native ESP32 emulators.** To make ESP32 simulation lighter and fully offline-capable, we're building new emulators for the ESP32, ESP32-S3, ESP32-C3 and ESP32-C6, written from scratch in JavaScript to run 100% in the browser — no backend, no server round-trips. They're entering extensive validation now.
- **ESP32-P4.** We've invested significant time in P4 emulation, including handling differences between chip revisions, so developers can explore the P4 from the browser while real silicon is still hard to come by and Arduino support matures.

> ## Try it now

Reviewer: Technically, the reader already tried it in the hands-on section. Not sure about this section name or if it should be here altogether. What do you think @f-hollow ?

Author: I rewrote a bit here to make it different

1. Open [velxio.dev/example/esp32-blink-led](https://velxio.dev/example/esp32-blink-led) — or browse 300+ projects at [velxio.dev/examples](https://velxio.dev/examples)
2. Pick any of the ten ESP32 boards, in C++ or MicroPython
3. Hit **Run**, watch it work, poke at the circuit
4. Export the project as a `.vlx` file — or flash the identical firmware to a real ESP32

{{< figure
    default=true
    src="img/examples-gallery-esp32.webp"
    alt="Velxio examples gallery filtered to ESP32 projects, plus ESP32-CAM and ESP32-C3 categories"
    caption="The examples gallery: nearly 80 one-click ESP32-family projects"
>}}

No account, no install, no commitment. If you'd like a board or peripheral supported, or have ideas for tutorials, come tell us:

- **GitHub**: [github.com/davidmonterocrespo24/velxio](https://github.com/davidmonterocrespo24/velxio)
- **Discord**: [discord.gg/3mARjJrh4E](https://discord.gg/3mARjJrh4E)
- **Docs**: [velxio.dev/docs](https://velxio.dev/docs)

---

> *David Montero is the creator of Velxio. He builds tools that make embedded development accessible to everyone — no hardware required. Reach him on [GitHub](https://github.com/davidmonterocrespo24) or at [velxio.dev](https://velxio.dev).*

Reviewer: Remove this section. The author information is already on top. 

```suggestion
```

Author: removed

---

> title: "Velxio: Browser-Based ESP32 Simulation That Runs on Real Hardware, Powered by AI Agents"

Reviewer 2: I suggest that you use the sentence case for the title (the same as you use for article sections). We encourage this on the Developer Portal. A big advantage is that the capitalized terms and product names are not diluted with all other words starting with a capital letter.

```suggestion
title: "Velxio: Browser-based ESP32 simulation that runs on real hardware, powered by AI agents"
```

Author: done, changed

date: 2026-07-31
summary: "This article introduces Velxio, an open-source, browser-based embedded simulator that runs real ESP32 firmware on emulated hardware. It explains how the simulator works under the hood, demonstrates LED, WiFi, MQTT, and sensor based projects, and highlights support for multiple boards across the ESP32 family."
tags:
  - ESP32
  - ESP32-S3

>   - ESP32-C3

Reviewer 2: You plan to add support for ESP32-P4 and maybe other SoCs down the road. Then you would need to add tags for them as well?

I suggest that you remove the names of specific products from the article tags.

Instead, why not add the tag `AI`?

Also, you can consider creating a new tag `web app` or something like this. I am sure we have more web apps related to Espressif chips that can also use this tag.

Author: I changed them to these

tags:
  - ESP32
  - Arduino
  - AI
  - web app
  - simulation
  - education

  - Arduino
  - simulation
  - education
authors:
  - "david-montero-crespo"
---

> One day, I was looking online for a way to emulate a project that used two ESP32 boards communicating over SPI. To my surprise, I couldn't find any platform that could run it. There were a few alternatives capable of emulating a single ESP32, but my project went much further: it also included resistors, diodes, and analog components, making the challenge even greater. That made me wonder: would it be possible to build a platform capable of running an entire embedded project directly in the browser? I decided to build a prototype to find out. That prototype eventually became Velxio.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One day, I was looking online for a way to emulate a project that used two ESP32 boards communicating over SPI. To my surprise, I couldn't find any platform that could do it. There were a few alternatives capable of emulating a single ESP32, but my project went much further: it also included resistors, diodes, and analog components, making the challenge even greater. That made me wonder: would it be possible to build a platform capable of running an entire embedded project directly in the browser? I decided to build a prototype to find out. That prototype eventually became Velxio.
```

Author: done

## Velxio's community today

> As of mid-2026, more than 15,000 developers have registered on Velxio, and they run over a thousand simulations every day. ESP32-family boards account for more than half of those simulations, making them by far the most popular hardware on the platform. The open-source core has gathered thousands of stars and hundreds of forks on GitHub.

Reviewer 2: Why not provide a link to the GitHub repo here?

Also, maybe it is just me, but it seems that the natural order is to cover some important project's features and numbers and then move on its community, not the other way around. With that said, feel free to do what you think is right.

Author: done, moved

> As of mid-2026, more than 15,000 developers have registered on Velxio, and they run over a thousand simulations every day. ESP32-family boards account for more than half of those simulations, making them by far the most popular hardware on the platform. The open-source core has gathered thousands of stars and hundreds of forks on GitHub.

Reviewer 2: You mention here: `15,000 developers have registered on Velxio`. A bit later: `that runs in a browser tab.`

As a person who wants to try it, I start wondering if Velxio is a paid online app or a self-hosted web app?

Then a few paragraphs later, I find `Fully self-hostable ... ships as one Docker image.

At this point, I still have a question about 15,000 registered users.

Then in the `Hands-on: your first ESP32 project in the browser` section, I find that it has an online version. The online version works without subscription. But to what extent? What sign-up gives me? Are there any paid tiers and what they give me? Conversely, does the Docker image offer all the features?

---

In a nutshell, the existing brief phrases "registered users" and "fully -self-hostable" are confusing.

Probably, this article is not the right place to explain the usage model in detail. I suggest that you give some clues about how it can be used and then refer to an external page (if you have one) explaining the details.

Throughout the article, you can probably refer to it as a web app (or something else) but more defined that just a simulator "that runs/works in the browser."

Author: briefly explained

- **Fully self-hostable.** The whole stack (frontend, backend, emulators, toolchains) ships as one Docker image.

## Hands-on: your first ESP32 project in the browser

Let's run the embedded "Hello World." Open [velxio.dev/example/esp32-blink-led](https://velxio.dev/example/esp32-blink-led), no sign-up needed. The example loads an **ESP32 DevKit V1** with an external LED already wired to GPIO4 through a resistor (the board's built-in blue LED sits on GPIO2):

```cpp
#define LED_BUILTIN_PIN 2   // Built-in blue LED
#define LED_EXT_PIN     4   // External red LED

void setup() {
  Serial.begin(115200);
  pinMode(LED_BUILTIN_PIN, OUTPUT);
  pinMode(LED_EXT_PIN, OUTPUT);
  Serial.println("ESP32 Blink ready!");
}

void loop() {
  digitalWrite(LED_BUILTIN_PIN, HIGH);
  digitalWrite(LED_EXT_PIN, HIGH);
  Serial.println("LED ON");
  delay(500);

  digitalWrite(LED_BUILTIN_PIN, LOW);
  digitalWrite(LED_EXT_PIN, LOW);
  Serial.println("LED OFF");
  delay(500);
}
```

> Click **Run**. The backend compiles the sketch with the arduino-esp32 core (you can watch the real build log scroll by) and then boots the binary on the emulated Xtensa LX6. Within seconds the LED is blinking on the canvas and the Serial Monitor streams `LED ON` / `LED OFF`:

Reviewer 2: Suggest laying out the procedure more explicitly:

````suggestion
Let's run the embedded "Hello World." You can do it on [velxio.dev](https://velxio.dev/) right now, without any sign-up:

1. Open [velxio.dev/example/esp32-blink-led](https://velxio.dev/example/esp32-blink-led). The example loads an **ESP32 DevKit V1** with an external LED already wired to GPIO4 through a resistor (the board's built-in blue LED sits on GPIO2):
  ```cpp
  #define LED_BUILTIN_PIN 2   // Built-in blue LED
  #define LED_EXT_PIN     4   // External red LED

  void setup() {
    Serial.begin(115200);
    pinMode(LED_BUILTIN_PIN, OUTPUT);
    pinMode(LED_EXT_PIN, OUTPUT);
    Serial.println("ESP32 Blink ready!");
  }

  void loop() {
    digitalWrite(LED_BUILTIN_PIN, HIGH);
    digitalWrite(LED_EXT_PIN, HIGH);
    Serial.println("LED ON");
    delay(500);

    digitalWrite(LED_BUILTIN_PIN, LOW);
    digitalWrite(LED_EXT_PIN, LOW);
    Serial.println("LED OFF");
    delay(500);
  }
  ```
2. Click **Run**. The backend compiles the sketch with the arduino-esp32 core (you can watch the real build log scroll by) and then boots the binary on the emulated Xtensa LX6. Within seconds the LED is blinking on the canvas and the Serial Monitor streams `LED ON` / `LED OFF`:
````

Author: done

> Click **Run**. The backend compiles the sketch with the arduino-esp32 core (you can watch the real build log scroll by) and then boots the binary on the emulated Xtensa LX6. Within seconds the LED is blinking on the canvas and the Serial Monitor streams `LED ON` / `LED OFF`:

Reviewer 2: > Click **Run**.

I was looking for the **Run** button for a few seconds. Then I started studying all the controls and found &#9658;. The tooltip said it _was_ a run button.

Why not describe the Run button in a more discoverable way, maybe like this?

2. On the toolbar at the top, click &#9658; to run the project. ...

Raw markdown:

```markdown
2. On the toolbar at the top, click &#9658; to run the project. ...
```

Author: changed

| ADC | 12-bit multi-channel; reads real solved voltages from the SPICE co-simulation |
| I²C / SPI | Protocol-level emulation driving OLED, TFT, sensor and SD components |
| RMT | WS2812-timing-accurate NeoPixel strips render correctly |
| LEDC / PWM | Hardware PWM channels |
| WiFi | Virtual access point (`Velxio-GUEST`) with SLIRP NAT out to the internet |
| Camera | ESP32-CAM bridges a real webcam frame into the emulated camera module |

The compile side is equally real. ESP32 sketches build against the arduino-esp32 3.3.10 core on ESP-IDF v5.5 inside the backend. A cold build compiles the full IDF (~1,500 objects, a few minutes), but ccache plus persistent per-target build directories mean warm compiles land in **under a minute**. Build options mirror the Arduino IDE Tools menu: partition schemes, CPU frequency, flash mode/size, PSRAM, core pinning for the Arduino loop, all serialized per board and translated into `sdkconfig` at compile time. You can even upload files into a SPIFFS partition from the browser.

ESP32-C3 boards take the same path on QEMU's RISC-V system emulation (RV32IMC), so the C3's peripherals are also emulated at the register level.

> Here's that peripheral stack in action. The [ESP32 Weather Station](https://velxio.dev/dave/estacin-meteorolgica-esp32) is a single project in which the emulated board:

Reviewer 2: I clicked the link and got the message "This project is private." See the screenshot below. If you cannot share the project publicly, maybe you can provide a screenshot of the browser tab instead?

<img width="480" height="300" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5294fcb5-6d76-432d-8568-c09b0bf197b3" />

Author: the project has been made public

- Reads a BMP280 (temperature + pressure) over I²C
- Reads a DHT22 (humidity) on a GPIO
- Draws a live dashboard on an ILI9341 TFT over SPI through the Adafruit GFX stack

Both emulated buses work at the same time. And this project has a twist: it wasn't wired by hand. It was designed, wired, and programmed end-to-end by Velxio's AI agent (that's its chat panel on the right of the screenshot).

{{< figure
    default=true
    src="img/station.webp"
    alt="ESP32 Weather Station running in Velxio, built end-to-end by the AI agent"
    caption="ESP32 Weather Station: BMP280 over I²C, DHT22 on GPIO, ILI9341 over SPI. Designed, wired, and programmed by the AI agent"
>}}

> ### WiFi that actually reaches the internet

Reviewer 2: The peripheral is often called `WiFi`. But the Wi-Fi protocol name uses a dash. You can check its specification, etc.

Also, why this section is a subsection to `Under the hood`? I suggest making it another second-level section:

```suggestion
## Wi-Fi that actually reaches the internet
```

Author: done

The emulated ESP32 joins a virtual open access point and gets NAT'd through the host. That means real `WiFi.begin()`, real DHCP, DNS, and TCP out to the world. The gallery's MQTT example connects to `broker.hivemq.com`, publishes to a unique topic, subscribes to the same topic, and toggles GPIO2 every time a message round-trips through the actual public broker:

```cpp
#include <WiFi.h>
#include <PubSubClient.h>

const char* WIFI_SSID   = "Velxio-GUEST";     // open AP the emulator advertises
const char* MQTT_BROKER = "broker.hivemq.com";

void connectWiFi() {
  WiFi.mode(WIFI_STA);
  WiFi.begin(WIFI_SSID);
  while (WiFi.status() != WL_CONNECTED) { delay(300); Serial.print("."); }
  Serial.printf("\nWiFi connected, IP %s\n", WiFi.localIP().toString().c_str());
}
```

HTTP clients, web servers (proxied so you can open the ESP32's page in another tab), and MQTT all work inside the simulation. Try this example: [velxio.dev/example/esp32-wifi-mqtt](https://velxio.dev/example/esp32-wifi-mqtt).

## An AI agent that builds circuits and firmware

> The [weather station above](https://velxio.dev/dave/estacin-meteorolgica-esp32) was not assembled by hand. Velxio includes an AI agent (on paid plans) that works directly on your live canvas and code editor: you describe what you want to build, and it builds it in front of you.

Reviewer 2: The link leads to a private project as mentioned above.

Author: done
